# Analysis of Change Surrounding Business Improvement Districts in Philadelphia

Business Improvement Districts, or BIDs, are a publicly sanctioned private entities formed to fund and oversee the provision of supplemental services, typically along commercial cooridors. They are formed through a vote, requiring a simple majority of property owners to be in favor of BID formation. Once formed these entities raise funds by charging members(property owners) an assessment fee, typically based on property value, but sometimes based on property size, size of sale transcations, or a combination of these factors. This money is then used to fund a variety of services including, street cleaning, private security forces, programing, facade improvements, adminstration, and other items. This model has gained increasingly popularity in the past decades as overall provision of services declined due to budget shortfalls in a number of American Cities. As cities across the country cut back on services like street sweeping and trash collection, property owners with the means to financially contribute have sought to take the provision of services under their own control through the creation of BIDs. However, the quasi-privitization of these services has come with a fair amount of discourse. The formation of BIDs can result in an improved public realm and the provision of fun interesting community events that would not exist without private intervention. It can also result in the commercilization of the limited amount of public spaces in American Cities - with the founding ethos of many of these BIDs based on creating improved spaces to draw in paying customers from elsewhere, not to make neighborhoods nicer for exisiting residents. Additionally, the governing structure of BIDs is incredibly opaque and is often accompanied by a complete lack of oversight. Some of the largest BIDs in the county oversee budgets as large as $30 million, but the public has little input into how this money is spent. There are also concerns regarding the proliferation of private security forces accompanying these BIDs, which some say leads to further crimilization of people deemed as undesirable by commercial entities, including unhoused people. Finally, some scholars link the creation of BIDs to the gentification of areas (PULL a quote of two), seeing their formation as the beining of changes in an areas that will lead to changes in property values, business types, and demographics of neighborhoods. In broad, sweeping strokes, those in favor of BIDs see it as a viable way to improve commercial corridors that may have gone without these services otherwise, those opposed see it as a further neoliberalization of public services that enables business and property owners to convert the public realm into network of small fiefdoms in which the presence of consumers is exaulted and anyone else is made to feel unwelcome.     


## Business Improvment Districts in Philadelphia
Various neighborhoods in Philadelphia have long pursued BIDs as a stratedgy to improve commercial cooridors. The creation of BIDs is enablced by State LAW (INSERT). The first BID in Philadelphia, the Center City District, was formed in 1991, by the Central Philadelphia Development Corporation (a 501c3 organizaiton, not a CDC). Since then 17 other BIDs have been formed, with roughly half of them being formed before the turn of the century. this model has been especially prevelent in Philadelphia, due to the city's continued budget difficulties and failure to provide adequate public services. However, part of this budget shortfall is related to the 10 year  100% property tax abatment for buyers purhcasing new or rehabed buildings that lasted from 2000 to 2021. Today there are still various tax abatment programs that encourage development, but result in significantly decreased tax revenue for the City. 

(Insert Static Map with BID Names) 

### BIDs and Neighborhood Change
Some of the more recently created BID's in Philadelphia have formed in areas that are in the very early stages of gentificaiton or are in full swing of gentification. To try and determine what, if any, impact these intitutions have had on gentification in these areas we will examine a collection of change indicators including: Median Household Income (MHHI), Median Rent, Percent Non-Hispanic White Residents, New Residential or Commercial Development, and New Business Formation. To try and parse out the impact that formation has, and try and understand the preconditions for formation, only BIDs that were formed between 2012 and 2022 were selected. This enables us to look at the data mentioned above for a few years before and after formation. Unfortunately, this means only four BIDs were selected, the Mayfair Business Improvment District (Est. 2015), the Northern Liberties BID (Est.2018), the Fishtown BID (Est.2019), and the North Broad Improvment District (Est.2022).   


(Insert Map with Slider that shows Census Data over time and BID formation over time)

A description of the data sources and the relevant data cleaning use in this analysis is below:

**Median Household Income (MHHI), Median Rent, and % Non-Hispanic White Residents:** Data pulled from the American Community Survey 5 year estimates for the years 2010-2022 at the block group level. Getting data at this grnular of a level resulted in some higher CV's, data with CV's over 40 are indicated by crosshatching across the relevant blcok group. 

**New Residential or Commercial Development:** Data pulled from the Open Philly Licenses and Inspections Building and Zoning Permits datatset for the years 2007-mid year 2024. This is an incredibly dense dataset that includes permits for home repairs, lot line relocations, and fire saftey inspections. To clean for these spurious observations, permit data was filterd by the 'Type of Work' column to specify for new construction. The data was further filtered by the 'Permit Description' column to subset for new construction and commercial or residential building services. The codes related to new construction in both columns had significantly changed over the years. A historgram of each variable by year was used to determine which codes were used over time, in order to avoid subsetting by a code that was only used for portion of the duration of this analysis. The dataset was clipped to a quarter mile buffer of the BIDs, which will help estimate neighborhood impact. A new variable that indicated years before or after BId formation was created to temporalize normalize all data and improve comparison across different BIDs. 

**New Business Formation:** Data pulled from the Open Philly Licenses and Inspections Business Licenses Dataset. Data for all businesses formed is not avaliable, this dataset only includes permits for businesses activity required to have a license like rental properties, resturants, vendors, etc. However, these types of businesses are often associated with gentificaiton and still help us understand the changing nature of a neighborhood. The dataset was further subset to exclude licenses for things such as dumpsters, towing permits, or scales and scanner permits, which are not indicative of new businesses forming. The Initial Formation Date column was used to determine business formation date. Additionally the distance between business locaiton, given in the xy coordinates of each observation, and owner location, written as text was used to determine change in localized ownership rates. The get the distance between the two locations in miles, the centroid from the ZIP code given in the owner address was taken and distance was calculated between the centrioid and the business location. Locations within the same zipcode were counted as 0, as this represents localized ownership. This data was clipped to the BID boundaries and not the BID buffer boundaries to focus on the impact of businesses within the district. A new variable that indicated years before or after BId formation was created to temporalize normalize all data and improve comparison across different BIDs.


### New Construction Permits and New Business Licenses Relative to BID Formation




<iframe src="bids.html" height="500" width="500"></iframe>


